Add a TROUBLESHOOTING.md page with performance related tips (#9462)
quarkusio/quarkus: TROUBLESHOOTING.md

# Troubleshooting performance issues

> Performance is at the heart of Quarkus.

Reviewer: General comment: `s/FlameGraphs/flame graphs/g`

Author: Done

Author: done

If you are facing performance issues (runtime or startup issues), and would like to discuss them with the Quarkus Team,
you are more than welcome on our [mailing list](https://groups.google.com/d/forum/quarkus-dev),
[Zulip chat](https://quarkusio.zulipchat.com) or [Github issue tracker](https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/issues).

> To help us to troubleshoot your issues, we will need some performance insight from your application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To help us troubleshooting your issues, we will need some performance insights from your application.
```

Author: Gracie plugin of IntelliJ suggests to replace troubleshooting by to troubleshoot. But maybe it's a difference between english english and american english ?

Author: Maybe @geoand can share some light on `to troubleshoot` vs `troubleshooting` ?

Reviewer 2: I am definitely not an English grammar expert (having grown up bilingual but crucially, not having attended English speaking school), but for the most corrent way of saying it would be:

```
To help us troubleshoot
```

Author: OK, done.

> On Linux or macOS, one of the best way to gather performance insight would be to generate CPU and allocation [FlameGraphs](https://github.com/brendangregg/FlameGraph) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On Linux or macOS, one of the best way to gather performance insights would be to generate CPU and allocation [FlameGraphs](https://github.com/brendangregg/FlameGraph) 
```

via [Async Profiler](https://github.com/jvm-profiling-tools/async-profiler).

> If you want a deeper introduction to Async Profiler, go read [this article](https://hackernoon.com/profiling-java-applications-with-async-profiler-049s2790).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you want a deeper introduction to Async Profiler, do checkout [this article](https://hackernoon.com/profiling-java-applications-with-async-profiler-049s2790).
```

## Installing Async Profiler

To install Async Profiler, go to the [release page](https://github.com/jvm-profiling-tools/async-profiler/releases) and download the latest release.

> Async Profiler depends on `perf_events`. <br/>

Reviewer: `<br/>`? Maybe we can avoid that :)

Author: Apparently two or more spaces do the same: it break the line without creating a new paragraph.
Didn't know this as `<br/>` also works.

Author: Replaces all `<br/>` with two spaces.

To allow capturing kernel call stacks using `perf_events` from a non-root process,

> you must make some OS configuration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
you must first apply a couple OS configuration options.
```

> For your session:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For your terminal session:
```

```shell script
echo 1 | sudo tee /proc/sys/kernel/perf_event_paranoid
echo 0 | sudo tee /proc/sys/kernel/kptr_restrict
```

> Or definitively using `sysctl`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Or permanently using `sysctl`:
```

```shell script
sudo sysctl -w kernel.perf_event_paranoid=1
sudo sysctl -w kernel.kptr_restrict=0
```

> For allocation profiling, you also need to install HotStop debug symbol.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For allocation profiling, you also need to install HotSpot debug symbol.
```

> Depending on your Linux and Java distribution this can be done via:

Reviewer: I'm not sure I would recommend that. I think most people don't use the JDK from the distribution.

Author: The way to install debug info on a non-distribution JDK is way harder, you need to download it and build it (and building C code can fail in a lot of possible ways).
I can find a link to add but it's way easier to install it this way and use the JDK from the distribution to launch the application.

Author: In fact you need to build your own JDK ...
In this case I would suggest to use a fastdebug build, it will be a slower JVM (JVM asserts will be enabled) but it includes debug symbols so it will works.

Author: I added a reference to fastdebug builds, didn't include a specific link but I could add one to https://builds.shipilev.net/ it's the only place I know where you can find those builds

```shell script
# Ubuntu/Debian - Java 8
apt install openjdk-8-dbg

# Ubuntu/Debian - Java 11
 apt install openjdk-11-dbg

> # On CentOS, RHEL and some other RPM-based distributions

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# On CentOS, RHEL and some other RPM-based distributions - Java 8
```

debuginfo-install java-1.8.0-openjdk

> ```

Reviewer 3: I wanted to add a suggestion here, but suggestion syntax is the same as a code block;

```
On CentOS, RHEL and some other RPM-based distributions - Java 11
debuginfo-install java-11-openjdk
```

Author: Added

> If needed, see this section in the documentation site for details: [allocation profiling](https://github.com/jvm-profiling-tools/async-profiler#allocation-profiling).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If needed, see [this](https://github.com/jvm-profiling-tools/async-profiler#allocation-profiling) section in the documentation site for details.
```

Reviewer: what is `documentation site`?

Author: In fact it's the README of Async Profiler, there is no documentation site.
Maybe I can re-phrase to `section in the Async Profiler site`.

## Profiling application runtime with Async Profiler

> Asych Profiler comes with a Java agent, and a command line.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Async Profiler comes with a Java agent, and a command line.
```

> To profile application during its runtime, I recommend using the command line as you can choose when to start the profiler, and avoid your profile to be bloated with startup events. <br/>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To profile application while it is running, it is recommended to use the command line as you can choose when to start the profiler and prevent your profile data from being bloated with startup events. <br/>
```

Reviewer: Let's remove all the `<br/>`

Author: I'll change all the `<br/>` to double space.

> Indeed, when an application start, it does a lot a bootstraping instruction, that will no more occur during the rest of the run of your application. <br/>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This can be important as any application performs a lot of bootstrapping operation upon startup that won't occur at any other during the application lifecycle. <br/>
```

> By starting the profiling when needed, you avoid these bootstrap instructions to be part of the profile.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By starting the profiling on demand, you prevent these bootstrap instructions from being part of the profile data.
```

> When you profile an application runtime, it's good to create some load on your application using a load generator tool (wrk, gatling, ...),

Reviewer 2: Maybe we  should have some links for wrk(2), gatling, hyperfoil etc...

Author: There is so many tools and some are paid so I don' want us to promote some over others ...
Adding links seems to promote these tools.

Reviewer 2: I don't agree, but I won't fight it :). 

For example we probably do want to be linking to wrk2 instead of wrk, it's too easy for people to get confused.

Author: OK, so maybe I can add some commonly tools with there links: ab, wrk2, Gatling, Apache JMeter at least ...

Reviewer 2: Sounds good to me, :+1:

Author: Updated

Reviewer 3: If are going to link to tools, we want to link to tools that we know do not suffer from co-ordination ommission problems, otherwise we end up with issues like this: https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/issues/9202

Reviewer 3: Maye this should be a separate doc with list of tools that we use, and how to use them?

Author: I can remove `ab` from the list.

As I previously said, load testing is a vast and debatable subject.

There is multiple type of tools (URL basher, scenario based load testing, ...), some are paid some are free, some uses complex injectors, ...
And using these tools is far from easy ...

I added these ones because these are the one I'm used to, but any will works to generates a profile (not any will works to simulate correctly user interaction).

I'm open to suggestion here, we can add a section about them or create a dedicated page for them later.

We also have the performance page where we can add some section to tools used to generate load: https://quarkus.io/guides/performance-measure
Maybe we need to link this page inside the performance page ?

> When you profile an application runtime, it's good to create some load on your application using a load generator tool (wrk, gatling, ...),

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is usually advised to profile an application under load. Such load could be created by a load generator tool (wrk, gatling, ...)
```

> and to start profiling only after some warmup time to allow the Just In Time compiler of Java to optimize your application code (and your database cache to warmup, etc...).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and to start profiling only after some warmup time to allow Java's Just In Time compiler of Java to optimize your application code (not to mention giving the opportunity for database caches to warmup, etc...).
```

### CPU profiling

> To start CPU profiling, enter the following command:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To start CPU profiling, execute the following command:
```

```shell script

> ./profiler.sh start -b 4000000 <pid>

Reviewer: It's unclear where `profiler.sh` comes from.

Author: I `/path/to/asynch-profiler` to be clear.

```

> `-b 4000000` is used to increase the frame buffer size as the default is usually too small.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`-b 4000000` is used to increase the frame buffer size as the default is often too small.
```

> To end profiling and gathering the result you can launch the same command with the `stop` subcommand, this will tells you if the buffer frame was too small. <br/>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To end profiling and gather the results you can launch the same command with the `stop` subcommand, this will tells you if the buffer frame was too small. <br/>
```

Reviewer: s/this will tells/this will tell/

> The output is a text file that is not really usable, so let's use our preferred performance representation: The FlameGraph.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The output is a text file that is not really usable, so let's use our preferred performance representation: the FlameGraph.
```

```shell script
./profiler.sh stop -f /tmp/cpu-profile.svg --width 1600 <pid>
```

> It will create an SVG FlameGraph (Async Profiler automatically detect that you ask for a FlameGraph thanks to the svg extension)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It will create an SVG FlameGraph (Async Profiler automatically detect that you ask for a FlameGraph thanks to the `svg` file extension)
```

Reviewer: s/automatically detect/automatically detects/

that you can open in your browser (and even zoom inside it by clicking on a frame). <br/>
The example command will create an SVG of 1600 pixels width.

> One of our favorite options is `-s` (or `--simple`) that use simple class names instead of FQDNs, the FlameGraph will be more readable with it, but you will lose the package name. <br/>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One very useful option is `-s` (or `--simple`) that results in simple class names being used instead of FQDNs, thus making the FlameGraph more readable (at cost of not showing the package names of classes). <br/>
```

Reviewer: FQCNs?

> You can also limit the profiling duration by using `-d` (or `--duration`) follow by the duration in seconds.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also limit the profiling duration by using `-d` (or `--duration`) followed by the duration in seconds.
```

> You can also limit the profiling duration by using `-d` (or `--duration`) follow by the duration in seconds.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can also limit the profiling duration by using `-d` (or `--duration`) follow by the duration in seconds. If you use the `--duration` option, the output file will be created automatically at the end of the duration period. You do not need to start and stop the profiler.
```

Author: I think we still need to start the profiler so it should be 

> You do not need to stop the profiler.

Reviewer 3: If you execute ;
```
$ ./profiler.sh -d 30 <pid>
```
This is the same as;
```
$ ./profiler.sh start <pid>
$ sleep 30
$ ./profiler.sh stop <pid>
```
This will attach the profiler to process `<pid>`, run for 30s then stop and write the output. A user does not need to execute `$ ./profiler.sh start -b <pid>` beforehand

Maybe this should be clearer, e.g. "You do not need to explicitly start and stop the profiler."

Author: Ah OK, so start is the default command!

Author: Done

### Allocation profiling

> To start allocation profiling, enter the following command:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To start allocation profiling, execute the following command:
```

```shell script
./profiler.sh start -b 4000000 -e alloc <pid>
```

> `-e` (or `--event`) allow to give the event to profile, by default it's CPU, here we want allocation profiling.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`-e` (or `--event`) allow to specify the type of event to profile. The default profile type is CPU, but in this case as we are interested in allocation profiling, we specify `alloc` as the `-e` value.
```

> Then you can stop your profiling the same way as for CPU profiling.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Stopping allocation profiling is done in the same way as for the previously shown CPU profiling.
```

```shell script
./profiler.sh stop -f /tmp/alloc-profile.svg --width 1600 <pid>
```

## Profiling application startup with Async Profiler

When you want to profile application startup, you cannot use the command line tool as you need a way to start the profiler with your application.

For this case, the Java agent is the best tool.
It will start profiling when you start the application, then record the profiling data when the application exits.

> Here is some example command lines:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some example usages are:
```

```shell script
# profile CPU startup
java -agentpath:/path/to/async-profiler/build/libasyncProfiler.so=start,event=cpu,file=startup-cpu-profile.svg,interval=1000000,width=1600,simple\
    -jar my-application.jar

# profile allocation startup
java -agentpath:/path/to/async-profiler/build/libasyncProfiler.so=start,event=alloc,file=/tmp/startup-alloc-profile.svg,interval=1000000,width=1600,simple\
    -jar my-application.jar
```

> Be careful that short options are not supported inside the agent, you need to use the long version.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that short options are not supported inside the agent, you need to use their long versions.
```

> By default, Async Profiler sample events each 10ms, for debugging Quarkus startup issue this is too much as we start very fast ;) <br/>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By default, Async Profiler sample events every 10ms. When it comes to profiling / debugging a Quarkus startup issue, this value is often too high as Quarkus starst very fast ;) <br/>
```

Reviewer: I would remove the smiley.

Author: OK, and maybe the type of @geoand `starst` => `starts` :)

> That's why I configure the profiling interval to 1000000ns (so 1ms).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For that reason, it is not uncommon to configure the profiling interval to 1000000ns (i.e. 1ms).
```

## Profiling application dev mode with Async Profiler

> For profiling Quarkus dev mode, you also need to use the Java agent, you can use it the same way as for production run, but you need to pass the `agentpath` option inside the `jvm.args` system property.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For profiling Quarkus dev mode, the Java agent is again necessary. It can be used in the same way as for the production application with the exception that `agentpath` option needs to be set via the `jvm.args` system property.
```

```shell script
# profile CPU startup
mvn quarkus:dev -Djvm.args="agentpath:/path/to/async-profiler/build/libasyncProfiler.so=start,event=cpu,file=startup-cpu-profile.svg,interval=1000000,width=1600,simple"

# profile allocation startup
mvn quarkus:dev -Djvm.args="-agentpath:/path/to/async-profiler/build/libasyncProfiler.so=start,event=alloc,file=/tmp/startup-alloc-profile.svg,interval=1000000,width=1600,simple"
```

> You can also configure the `jvm.args` system property directly inside the `quarkus-maven-plugin` configuration inside your pom.xml.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also configure the `jvm.args` system property directly inside the `quarkus-maven-plugin` section of your pom.xml.
```

> ## And what about Windows ?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## And what about Windows?
```

If you are on Windows, you can still get useful performance insights using JFR - Java Flight Recorder.

> The following java options will enable JFR to record profiling data inside a `myrecording.jfr` file that can then be used by JMC - Java Mission Control for analysis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following Java options will enable JFR to record profiling data inside a `myrecording.jfr` file that can then be used by JMC - Java Mission Control for analysis.
```

```shell script
-XX:+FlightRecorder -XX:StartFlightRecording=filename=myrecording.jfr,settings=profile -XX:FlightRecorderOptions=stackdepth=64
```

> Here I configure JFR with a deeper stack depth as the default is usually not enough.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here we configure JFR with a deeper stack depth as the default is usually not enough.
```
